the difference in lift printing compared
to black and white is primarily the
effects that you get with Tony and with
texture in the print the tones will
range anywhere from very soft warm tones
of maybe some salmony tones all the way
to some very very intense hot tones in
oranges and yellows and ochres and
things like that the workflow is very
different because the amount of time
that you spend in the enlarger with
print about exposure you get the paper
basically is that that determines what
the colors that you're going to get in
in the mid-tones and the prints
hi this is an example of what I'm
talking about this is a basically a
black-and-white negative with black and
white developing paper or enlargement
paper and the tones that you see in here
are dependent on this particular type of
emulsion that's in this paper as well as
the strength in the amount of exhaustion
that the developer is going one of the
things that you'll notice in this image
are the colors these very warm tones
that you have in here are part of the
process for the printing and again is
something that is defended long maturity
of the developer or the length of time
the developer has been in the tray these
other colors that you see there's some
posterize greens and such is a result of
a second bath that you would do with the
print in putting it into an Omega the
other characteristics of length is the
way the shadows or the dark areas of the
print develop out and is part of the
infectious process of the lift developer
when the shadows start to form your hat
or very close to the snatch point where
you have to pull the print out of the
developer immediately don't let it drain
put it right into the stop bath until
development all right the grain in the
emulsion when the blacks and the shadows
start to develop out is very rapid and
the best illustration of it is it's very
much like someone put your buffing block
morning to come slow
nothing that he's very accelerated this
is what happens so you could be in the
developer for anywhere from five to 20
minutes to 30 minutes 45 minutes even
sometimes and everything is going along
very very smoothly and very evenly in
terms of getting all these nice
beautiful warm tones and those mid tones
but when the blacks start to develop out
and the shadows start to come in the
process accelerates very rapidly
and this is when you have to really be
paying attention to whatever marker you
have on the in the image that you want
to have come out in the tray before you
snatch it out and again you snatch it
out and you throw it immediately into
the stop bath to kill the development
all right so we're back again and this
is the scene of the crime we in talking
about the process we also should talk
about the paper and we should talk about
the chemicals the paper that I primarily
use is form of paper this is from the
Czechoslovakian the Czech Republic they
have the best tones for my purposes
there are other papers that can be used
and other people have their favorites as
well this was the one that I use
primarily the chemicals that I use are
also primarily excuse me these are the
chemicals from Wolfgang Moorish from
Germany he's a master of the printer and
chemist as well his stuff can be gotten
from freestyle and I used the se5 system
there is also an EZ lift system the
chemicals once you have mixed your a and
your B which is your sodium bromide and
sulfides they shouldn't be mixed until
they're ready to use because it began to
exhaust almost immediately once you've
mixed the chemicals you also add what
it's known as old Brown here's the old
Brown Jug for it and it's a little bit
of the developer from the last batch of
the developer that you made and it's
sort of like this is where the alchemy
comes in because it begins to be like
making sourdough bread or something you
have a starter that you add into it to
help to speed along the process of
maturing chemicals so here we are at the
wet side of the darkroom and once you've
got your exposure from the enlarger and
you move it over to your developing
trade your normal time if you were
looking at doing a standard black and
white print could be anywhere in the
ballpark of two minutes in the developer
however with lith you're looking at
anywhere from five or six minutes on the
very short end to
as much as 20 minutes to a half an hour
to even 40 minutes in the development
before you reach that snatch point when
you're when you have your lift developer
you're going to have a Part A and A Part
B and when you mix the appropriate
amount of a and B into distilled water
by the way and you put it into the
developing tray and you add your old
Brown there are also when you get your
chemicals from Wolfgang you're going to
get apart CD in an e so you have some
other restraints and some other ways of
controlling what sometimes it comes out
as pepper fogging or something to
restrain the time that different areas
of the print start to develop out okay
all right I use the Thomas safe light
it's it doesn't seem to be it doesn't
seem to give any problems to the this
particular paper and we're going to do
just a little bit of a trial run here to
show what happens so if you want to
we're going to go to dark for a while
cause I'm going to turn the light out
and be the safe flight
it's almost impossible to try to cover
all of the subtleties and all the
variances that you can do with cliff
praying in such a short little video
like this but I'm going to have a email
address on my website and you can
certainly go there and ask questions and
I'd be more than happy to talk to
anybody who has any questions or
concerns about the process
well what you see here is what you would
get with a paper negative and this
particular paper negative if you look
very closely at blacks
there's some banding in the blacks you
have that characteristic of a paper
negative and on the print itself we have
color which is wonderful and you can see
that there are some very warm tones that
are coming in here with these sort of
ochres and things the dry down will give
you a different color as well but it's
an interesting effect with what we would
expect to have as as a clear area back
here that would get color we're seeing
where the light from the enlarger went
through
you